---
layout: archive
title: "Supervision"
permalink: /supervision/
author_profile: true
---


<!-- # **PhD Co-Supervision** -->

<h2 style="color: lightblue;">PhD Thesis</h2>
## Student: Abdelhak HEROUCHA

* **Title:** QoE, Explicability and End-to-End trustworthiness among very large heterogeneous IoT Systems: use case of Healthcare applications.
* **Abstract:** The main objective of the thesis is to see how to install original QoE-based functionalities to guarantee trustiness among all domains followed by an IP traffic among several and heterogeneous IoT Healthcare Systems/Domains under 5G/5G Beyond/6G slicing technologies in the context of New IP architectures and to produce prototypes to evaluate our proposals in the case of Very Large Scale Smart Cities and Health situations. These fields are linked with our past studies on Inter-Autonomous Systems Quality of Service (QoS)/Quality of Experience (QoE)-based Routing, Knowledge/Data plan and Control Plan development. In fact, the flexibility and dynamics of the new generation network infrastructure often based on SDN raise important security issues: sensitive data can easily be transferred between different sites, and false knowledge injected at the right time in the network can lead to violation of some constraints. Furthermore, there is a massive and exponential increase in both the number of nodes and in usage. The question that arises is, therefore, how to design a network that can guarantee the satisfaction of all users even in the case of contradictory objectives. How to ensure traceability at all times, and finally, how to guarantee that each component of the system, software or hardware, is a trusted element.
* **Keywords:** Networks, Explainable Artificial Intelligence, Routing/Meta Routing, SDN, Big Data, Scalability.
* **Establishment:** Paris-East Créteil University (UPEC).
* **Laboratory:**  Laboratoire Images, Signaux et Systèmes Intelligents (LISSI).
* **Doctoral school:** École doctorale Mathématiques, Sciences et Technologies de l'Information et de la Communication.
* **Duration:** September 2025 - Present.
<br/>

---

## Student: Rafik DERRADJI

* **Title:** Implementation of an on-board Zero-Touch adaptive and explainable Trustworthiness QoE-centered decision support system for mission-critical operations.
* **Abstract:** The evolution of technologies driven by the significant increase in data exchange capacities with the upcoming arrival of 6G, the numerous applications stemming from IoT, the multiplication of information sources and flows, and the availability of increasingly advanced and diverse devices and accessories, necessitate rethinking decision-support tools. In the field targeted by this thesis, namely video surveillance, administrations, organizations, and security agents in the field and command centers are, and will increasingly be, faced with a considerable amount of information. The ''intelligent'' exploitation of this information could enable disruptive advancements in the effectiveness and efficiency of their missions. This thesis builds on the work carried out by Airbus and the LISSI laboratory, which led to the creation of an initial decision-support platform based on the user experience paradigm (Quality of Experience, QoE). It aims to address new challenges by integrating explainable, adaptive, and frugal artificial intelligence technologies to enhance the effectiveness of video surveillance systems and support field agents. The main objectives of this research include the integration of explainability mechanisms to enable end-users to understand system decisions, thereby strengthening their trust and operational efficiency. The project also seeks to develop a scalable system based on the zero-touch paradigm, capable of learning in real time from new data and responding to unknown situations. By leveraging reinforcement learning, the aim is to optimize an agent's actions in dynamic and uncertain environments, with a deep understanding of the surroundings to maximize long-term performance. Human-machine interaction is studied to design cooperative systems that integrate up-to-date, multi-scale data to optimize decision-making. Additionally, frugal solutions are explored to ensure reliable operation even in the event of disruptions, such as communication losses with the control center. Finally, the integration of Trust QoE will enable the design of a system ensuring a trustworthy user experience by guaranteeing security, reliability, and rapid decision-making, particularly in high-risk situations. This future system will stand out through its ability to support first responders during their missions with accessible visual explanations, continuously adapt to field conditions using data generated by generative AI techniques, and optimize resource management to reduce energy consumption while maintaining high performance levels.
* **Keywords:** Trustworthy QoE, Trustworthy AI, Zero-touch, Explainability, Generative AI, Real-time.
* **Establishment:** Paris-East Créteil University (UPEC).
* **Laboratory:**  Laboratoire Images, Signaux et Systèmes Intelligents (LISSI).
* **Doctoral school:** École doctorale Mathématiques, Sciences et Technologies de l'Information et de la Communication.
* **Duration:** September 2025 - Present.

  <br/>

---

## Student: Miled ALAM

* **Title:** Towards secrecy energy-efficient solutions for cooperative backscatter-aided non-orthogonal multiple access systems.
* **Abstract:** The rapid development of next-generation wireless networks comes with increasing requirements in terms of massive connectivity, energy efficiency, and secure communications. In this context, Non-Orthogonal Multiple Access (NOMA) has emerged as a key technology to serve multiple users simultaneously over the same spectral resources. In parallel, Ambient Backscatter Communication (AmBC) offers an energy-efficient solution by enabling passive data transmission using ambient signals. However, the open nature of the wireless channel makes these systems vulnerable to passive eavesdropping attacks, which raises the need to design robust protection  mechanisms. 
In this regard, Physical Layer Security (PLS) is an emerging paradigm that addresses this challenge by exploiting the inherent characteristics of the wireless channel, such as noise, fading, dispersion, and interference, to ensure confidentiality between legitimate users in the presence of potential eavesdroppers.
In this thesis, we study novel resource allocation strategies for maximizing the secrecy energy-efficiency (SEE) in multi-user NOMA networks, with or without ambient backscatter assistance.
First, we study a downlink NOMA system in the presence of a passive eavesdropper. Assuming perfect channel state information, we formulate a bi-objective optimization problem aiming to maximize the secrecy rate while minimizing power consumption, under a total power budget and minimum rate per user constraints. We derive an exact solution for the optimal power allocation in the scalarized case, which not only characterizes all the optimal points on the Pareto boundary, but also significantly reduces the complexity of the fractional problem. In particular, when the objective is the ratio between the total secure throughput and the total consumed power, our optimal solution allows Dinkelbach’s algorithm to be reduced to a simple one-dimensional bisection search, thus avoiding any complex iterative numerical resolutions. Simulations highlight the advantage of NOMA over Orthogonal Multiple Access (OMA) in terms of the secrecy rate vs. power trade-off.
Next, we extend our study by integrating ambient backscatter devices that transmit their own data by modulating the radio signal they receive from the transmitter without emitting any active signal. In a first scenario, we consider a single fixed device acting as a passive relay. By exploiting the structure of the composite channel, we obtain an exact solution for optimal resource allocation. The study is then extended to more general configurations, including multiple cooperative devices. In this case, the problem becomes significantly more complex, making exact approaches impractical. We then propose a heuristic method based on the Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) algorithm, enabling the joint allocation of transmit powers and backscatter reflection coefficients. The results show that the secrecy energy-efficiency improves with the number of backscatter devices, and that the gains remain robust even in the presence of estimation errors on the eavesdropper's channel.
Finally, we develop an approach based on Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) to predict optimal resource allocations in dynamic environments. A Feedforward Neural Network (FNN) is trained from reference solutions obtained from our previous contributions. To ensure interpretability, we use the SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) method to identify the most influential input variables. This solution reaches up to $96.2\%$ of the performance of exact optimization, while significantly reducing the computational complexity, thus providing a fast, scalable, and interpretable solution suitable for real-time systems.
* **Keywords:** Non-Orthogonal Multiple Access (NOMA), Ambient Backscatter Communication (AmBC), Physical Layer Security (PLS), Energy Efficiency, Internet of Things (IoT), Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI).
* **Establishment:**  IMT Nord Europe.
* **Laboratory:**  Center for Education, Research and Innovation in Digital Systems (CERI-SN).
* **Doctoral school:** École doctorale Mathématiques, sciences du numérique et de leurs interactions.
* **Duration:** September 2025 - Present.

<br/>


<h2 style="color: lightblue;">Internships</h2>

## Student: Stéphane KOUAME

* **Title:** XAI-assisted Deep Receiver Design in Wireless Communications.
* **Establishment:** SogetiLabs & IMT Nord Europe - France
* **Duration:** April 2025 - August 2025.

<br/>

---

## Student: Romain GRANGE

* **Title:** SDN Network Automation Using Graph Neural Networks (GNNs).
* **Establishment:** SogetiLabs & Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1- France
* **Duration:** April 2024 - August 2024.

<br/>

---

## Student: Ilyes GHOMARI

* **Title:** SDN Traffic Classification and Rerouting Using Reinforcement Learning (RL).
* **Establishment:** SogetiLabs & Université UVSQ - France
* **Duration:** April 2024 - August 2024.

<br/>

---

## Student: Mouhamed SY

* **Title:** Optimizing Semantic Segmentation Models with Explainable AI (XAI).
* **Establishment:** SogetiLabs & Université PSL- France
* **Duration:** Jan 2024 - August 2025.

<br/>

---

## Student: Mohamed QASSIR

* **Title:** SDN Network end-to-end Implementation Using MiniNet Emulator.
* **Establishment:** SogetiLabs & ESIEE Paris - France
* **Duration:** December 2023 - August 2024.

<br/>

---

## Student: Nada RAKRAKY 

* **Title:** Infrastructure design, security, and virtualization with VMware GNS3 simulator.
* **Establishment:** ENSEA Cergy - France
* **Duration:** June 2021 - September 2021.

<br/>

---

  
